## Germ line versus somatic:
CNV Germline CNV are relatively short (a few bp to a few Mbp) copy number changes that the individual inherits from one of the two parental gametes and thus are typically present in 100% of cells.

Somatic CNV (often called CNA where A stands for alterations or aberration) are copy number changes of any size and amount (from a few bases to whole chromosomes) that happen (and often carry on happening) in cancer cells. Cancer cells can be aneuploid (that means they are largely triploid, tetraploid or even aploid) and can have high focal amplifications (some regions could have many copies: it is not unusual to have 8-12 copies for some regions). Furthermore, because tumor samples are typically an admixture of normal and cancer cells, the tumor purity in unknown and variable.

Different algorithms make different assumptions while handling somatic or germ line CNV. Typically, germ line cnv caller can assume:

The genome is largely diploid.
The sample is pure and homogeneous.
Any gain or loss should be 50% move or 50% less coverage.
For these reasons, the algorithms can focus more on associating p-values for each call; it is possible to estimate false positive and false negative rates.

Somatic CNA callers cannot make any of the assumption above, or if they do, they have limited scope.

EstimatesofCNAsalsodependon:
–  Cancer Cell Fraction (CCF) of CNAs 
–  Purity of the tumor samples

 1) ability to work with heterogeneous tumors, 
 2) high sensitivity even for comparatively short CNAs or sub-clonal events with the low CCF, 
 3) high specificity even for noisy samples; 
 4) ability to perform allelespecific calling for the deciphering of complex CNAs, 
 5) ability to work with all the types of NGS data used for the analysis of cancer genomes, 
 6) intuitive output visualization for clinical interpretation by clinicians